---
title: TEDxNTU 2015
date: 2015-10-22 11:33:00 +0800
categories: [general-writing]
tags: [life, events]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
---

The topic was: **Life – What’s the point?** And after examining from various perspectives, from theoretical physics to biology, medicine, philosophy, sociology, etc. I came to a conclusion – the question is very much rhetorical. We are, first of all, just tiny little creatures swarming in our own equally tiny habitat. We live, we just do. We simply exist in this world, and while it must be really fun to mull under a tree on a chilly day, thinking about where we actually come from, it is wholeheartedly better to live, while FEELING like living. There’s the point. The point is, you truly feel it. Wir leben.

I met some absolutely inspirational people, and I am in tears just reminiscing about that amazing experience. Most of them left a lesson, questions, stories, and so so much insightful thoughts that left me hungry for more. Hungry to learn more. Simply energized.

We began with Jim Holt’s Sheldon Cooper style-talk on a universe – level. Why does the universe exist? where he talked about us being just one “tiny part of reality” controlled by the laws of quantum field theory and countless other parallel realities that exist out there, stretching from nothingness to literally everything. Now, some scientists said that our reality is the most elegant mathematically – but he disagreed otherwise. Now the point is, we are living in a very generic, mediocre reality, but that very imperfection makes our existence meaningful because we have good things and bad things that coexist, and the purpose as a whole is to make the good things better and less bad things to happen. That’s the purpose right there, constructed by not an elegant universe where we are forced to exist elegantly, or a multiverse where anything could happen, but this very reality that we are living in.

Now, let’s move on. Another highlight to me personally was a very entertaining talk made by biologist Kristen Sadler, whereby she talked about life from a very biological point of view. We exist because it’s a competition of the genes to be passed on to later generations, and she then demonstrated a number of interesting theories and experiments about how we humans perceive good and bad genes, and how selection actually happens in our head. Apparently a person whose scent you find pleasant is a good DNA match for you, or menstruation cycles can affect your perception of someone’s attractiveness. Most interestingly, if you are homosexual or have no intention to have children, you are NOT a biological failure (YAY!), but rather you tend to look out for your closest relatives.

A couple of other speakers talked about life as being meaningful, and being human. We heard from an HIV and gay man who crafted his own path into living where all hopes seemed to have failed, and another ex-convict, now-artist who stressed that it is never the end of the world as long as you still have a chance to live. Two speakers who are doctors confirmed this very statement – you are living even if you are on the verge of death. More time, please.

Find a purpose to breathe every day, and you will continue to ask for more time. Not just for you, but for the people you love. Remember, people who love you will ask for more time for you to live. So live. Breath in confidently.
