---
title: Akrasia
date: 2020-10-05 11:33:00 +0800
categories: [sunday-snippets]
tags: [life, philosophy, think-roam]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
---

## What I’ve been thinking about

I’m back after a bit of a hiatus (always a great substitution for the word laziness). I know, I know, I’m totally going against the advices from the book Atomic Habits (which reminds me, I owe myself a book summary post. This is quickly spinning into a rabbit hole of me owing stuffs to myself).  

This week, I finished reading a summary of Aristotle’s Ethics by Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy. This is the first time I actually read anything remotely related to philosophy at all despite Ethics being a mandatory subject in my secondary and high school education. It would be fair to say I was searching for some guidance, as there were events that made me seriously question virtuous practices.  

Aristotle argued that the ultimate goal in life is eudaimonia (happiness) and euzen (living well), and the reason why happiness is the ultimate end is that it exists not for the sake of other goals. Rather, other goals such as health and wealth are sought because they promote well-being.  

But that wasn’t really why I was searching for his writings. I wanted to understand what characterizes moral strength and vice versa. To this, Aristotle first emphasized that we as humans set ourselves apart from other species because we have the capacity to guide ourselves by using reason. Happiness, to Aristotle, isn’t a virtue – it is a virtuous activity. In other words, living well isn’t just merely being in a certain state or condition, but consists in doing lifelong activities that ‘actualize the virtues of the rational part of the soul.’  

All humans are capable of reason, but why do people make bad decisions all the time? I’m obliged here to call out that Aristotle apparently stated that only males are born with the potential to become ethically virtuous, which obviously isn’t the case. Nevertheless, he described that a virtuous person uses reason to guide his actions, but most importantly is when he has decided what to do, he does not have to contend with internal pressures to act otherwise. On the other hand, bad decisions are made because the person making them is suffering from some internal disorders. He categorized three types of people, but I will focus on the first and second categories (the third category is evil, which is rather already quite straightforward).  

The two types of character traits here are continence (enkrateia) and incontinence (akrasia). In simpler terms, they translate to mastery and lack of mastery. These traits sit somewhere in between the virtues and the vices. An akratic person goes against reason as a result of emotions. An enkratic person also experiences emotions that contradict reason, but he/she still acts in accordance with reason. In short, the akratic person gives in to his/her feelings, while the enkratic person does not.

There are two kinds of akrasia – impetuosity (propeteia) and weakness (astheneia).  

> "The person who is weak goes through a process of deliberation and makes a choice; but rather than act in accordance with his reasoned choice, he acts under the influence of a passion. By contrast, the impetuous person does not go through a process of deliberation and does not make a reasoned choice; he simply acts under the influence of a passion."

Arguably, the impetuous person does not experience any internal conflict at the time of action, but once the act is completed he or she would regret what he or she has done.  

So after reading all of this, what’s the point ? Have I found the answer to my question as to what makes moral strength and weakness? Indirectly, or rather, there is no clear cut answer, although I take some comfort in the framework that Aristotle laid out. We lay on a spectrum of morality, with reason running as the backbone. The next time you make a bad decision or a good one, think about where on the spectrum do you sit. Do you often see your emotions conflicting with your reason, and thus disrupting your internal harmony? Do you see reason prevail, or you ski down the path of impetuosity?  

If you’re interested, you can read the full summary [here](https://plato.stanford.edu/entries/aristotle-ethics/)

## Video of the Week

I binged an entire three seasons of Attack On Titan this week and hands down the entire anime deserves to be in the hall of fame this week. If you do not know that the anime is about, it tells the story of humanity living inside three layers of walls, which are meant to protect humanity from a species of giants called “Titan”. One day, the titans broke a whole in the wall, causing massive chaos and from there, dark secrets await. Attack On Titan is probably one of the most ruthless anime series I have ever seen but also one of the most creative in terms of the character development and the overall plot.

## Quote of the week

> "The only thing we’re allowed to believe is that we won’t regret the choice we made."
*Hajime Isayama (Attack on titan)*

Charge in, guns blazing!
