---
title: Hacking Darwin by Jamie Metzl
date: 2020-11-06 11:33:00 +0800
categories: [book-notes]
tags: [tech, bigdata]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
image: /assets/img/hacking-darwin.jpg
---

Being a bio major in highschool, I’ve always had an ear out for genetic advancements. Yet, this book has a mind-blowing experience to me – not only have I gained a significant understanding of where humanity stands currently in genetic engineering and the astonishing achievements scientists have gotten in less than a decade, but also the book is a big thought experiment where Jamie laid out a myriad of possible paths that genetic engineering could go, illustrating the complexity of the technology going beyond just a question of ethics. We as humans, more than ever, need to be aware, and actively participate in the global conversation that would shape our future in fundamentally transformative ways.

Rating: ⭐⭐⭐⭐⭐

## 💡 How the Book Changed Me

I have a much better idea in terms of where genetic engineering technology currently stands, and realize that we have progressed much further than what I initially thought. My summary/notes section below has all the interesting points that I have captured.
The answer to the question of whether humans should allow genetic engineering is not such a straightforward question. There are so many different aspects of genetic engineering that when combined with the already complex world dynamic means creates a multitude of possible answers and ways to proceed. One thing is clear though – this must be a global coordinated effort. The future of humanity rests on us thinkers today who will use our diverse backgrounds and expertise to solve this question together.

## 📒 Summary/Notes

Interesting points that I have noted down:

- We have deeply ingrained notions about what’s natural but much of it isn’t natural at all. We’ve been genetically altering our food, medicine (antibiotics), and many things else. Question – if we have been in the business of altering the biological and other systems around us for so long, must we think of the biology we have inherited from our parents as our destiny? Do we have the right or even the obligation to work out the bugs and software coding errors in the hardware of our bodies?
- We think of anti-vaccination folks as people who are causing harm to their own children and possibly other children while from the anti-vaccination folks’ POV it is going with nature. With the ever-advancing IVF and genome sequencing, conceiving a baby through sex may become a risk that parents will need to weigh. Would we reach a point where parents conceiving babies ‘naturally’ are perceived the same way anti-vaccination people are perceived right now?
- Considering that assisted reproduction is becoming the norm (1.5% of babies in the US are conceived through IVF and up to 5% in Japan), LGBT couples are considered a force for social change.
- “The intersection of AI and genomics will become more powerful as deep-learning techniques become more sophisticated, more and larger data sets of sequenced genomes become available, and our ability to decipher more of the underlying principles of our systems biology grows […] scientists will use AI tools to better understand how complex genetic patterns can lead to specific outcomes. The real benefit comes from not only sequencing very large numbers of people but also from comparing their genotypes (their genetic makeup) to their phenotypes (how these genes are expressed over the course of their lives). The more sequenced genomes can be matched with detailed life records shared in a common database, the better able we will be to figure out what our genes and other biological systems are doing.”
- What if matching a cancer cure to our genetic code was just as easy, just as standard? What if figuring out the right dose of medicine was as simple as taking our temperature? In 2018, Geisinger Health System (based in Danville, Pennsylvania) announced it was offering free genome sequencing to all patients as part of standard preventative care. Geisinger’s preliminary research found actionable findings in 3.5 percent of patients. **For the patients, finding potential future dangers can be useful and potentially lifesaving. For the health system, sequencing patients potentially enables better care and could even lead to higher revenue from additional services provided in the short term and could provide savings down the line from preventing more serious conditions. On a societal level, identifying genetic abnormalities early has the potential to make the overall population healthier and reduce the downstream costs of care.**
- Biology is not linear. Two thirty-year-old adult humans can have a child who is born zero years old, not thirty or sixty. Clearly, our cells already have a way of resetting the clock. In the 1950s, Oxford biologist John Gurdon proved that any adult cell, under the right circumstances, had the innate ability to go back in developmental time to become the equivalent of an embryonic stem cell through experiments with frog egg and sperm cells.
- **Yamanaka factors**: discovered in 2006, Yamanaka factors are 4 ‘master genes’ that could turn back the clock and transform any adult cell back to a stem cell. Any skin, blood, liver, or other types of cells can go back to embryonic stem cells (induced pluripotent stem cells or iPSCs) → open door to an exponentially faster process of creating, editing, testing, and evaluating potential embryos among a myriad of other potential applications. In my opinion, this is absolutely ground-breaking.
- If you have to remember a word, remember CRISP. CRISP stands for clustered regularly interspaced short palindromic repeats, and CRISP Cas-9 is the knife we use to edit genes.
- Some applications of CRISP and gene editing in general include:
  - The gene-edited “Arctic apple” can be sliced and left out in the open without browning because scientists have used CRISPR to silence a gene controlling the production of an enzyme that causes apples to brown.
  - Virus-resistant Rainbow papaya gene-edited to avoid the devastating papaya ringspot virus is in supermarkets, as is the bruise-resistant Innate potato.
  - Del Monte has received approval to gene-edit a pink pineapple modified to contain more of the antioxidant lycopene than regular pineapples.
  - Waxy corn that makes better cornstarch, wheat with a higher fiber and lower gluten content, tomatoes better able to grow in warm climates, and cameline with enhanced omega-3 fatty acids are all on the way, thanks to CRISPR technology.
  - Gene-editing tools are also being used aggressively on animals, creating animals that are more resilient to diseases and weather conditions while producing more animal products such as milk, eggs, etc.

⇒ This technology has the potential to protect billions of dollars of crops and save the lives of millions of the world’s poorest people. In Africa and South Asia, where huge percentages of the population are subsistence farmers, average temperatures are warming, and populations are expanding, this need is particularly stark. Using gene editing to create new, more resilient, faster-growing varieties of rice and other crops that need less water could, in the words of Microsoft founder and philanthropist Bill Gates, “be a lifesaver on a massive scale. “

- Chronic diseases such as cancer or heart disease account for the majority of deaths in the US, but these diseases correlate with age, and hence even if you manage to eliminate one it will not help that much. Eliminate all cancer from the US and life expectancy only goes up a little more than 3 yrs → we need to worry less about countering the disease of aging and more on slowing aging itself.
- Humans can start by looking at editing single genes.
  - David Altschuler recruited a cohort of elderly and overweight people who were statistically at a high risk of developing type 2 diabetes but hadn’t. After sequencing the members of the group, he came to believe that a single mutation in the SLC30A8 gene made his cohort 65 percent better able to regulate their insulin levels and less likely to get diabetes.
  - Another study found that 1 percent of Northern Europeans carried a mutation in their CCR-5 gene that makes them immune to HIV infection.
  - Another elderly study found that about one in 650 people with mutations of their NPC1L1 gene had less than half the risk of a heart attack compared to people just like them but without the mutation.
- Because making small changes to the human genome is easier and safer than making big ones, identifying single-gene mutations with significant potential positive impact raises the enticing possibility of gene editing these small mutations into ourselves or future children. But of course, we have to be careful, considering that humans have not had a full understanding of how different genes may interact with each other. Edit one gene may result in a positive effect but at the same time bring about other negative consequences.
  - This is especially true in the case of complex traits like height or intelligence. Stanford researchers argued that most traits and diseases are not just polygenic but instead omnigenic where traits are influenced by not just core genes that we know about but also by a much larger network of peripheral genes that don’t.
- Setting the ethical debate of gene editing aside, if humans go with gene edit, how are we to overcome our present moment biases? Can we ensure that our trait selection would not reflect our own cultural bias? Would we see cases of parents wanting to choose an embryo with the lowest chance to be homosexual, or highest chance to be light-skinned? Maybe. One of the central debate of genetic engineering is whether we are going against nature, but we must not forget the importance of diversity through random selection and natural selection that nature has done to over millions of years.
  - If enough people make choices that reflect biases we would essentially be weaponizing these biases and make our species genetically more uniform and less able to withstand unknown risks in the future. We cannot ignore the evolutionary benefits of our diversity.
- We must also consider the issue of equity. The uneven distribution of genetic technologies could lead to terrible consequences. Imagine only wealthy people could genetically engineer their children; these children could come to dominate societies. Or imagine employers discriminating based on whether a candidate is genetically engineered or not. The gap would be widening to the point where it cannot be bridged.
- One idea is to use genetic screening as a service to disadvantaged communities and provide extra opportunities for people with genetic potential in certain areas.
- Different countries respond very differently to new technologies, from GM crops, abortion to genetically engineered humans → a wide variety of legal and regulatory environment around the world. On the positive side this means each country is racing to find its own answers and competition is good in the sense that it will drive innovation forward. But of course we can’t forget other ethical dilemmas such as data privacy vs big data. Different countries make different bets and good bets turn out great but bad ones will lead to dire consequences.
- A global agreement framework, if available, would need to “neither offend the sensibilities of powerful constituencies deeply uncomfortable with the concept of human germline engineering nor impede the development of new generations of knowledge and its application on which trillions of dollars of commerce; the competitiveness of individuals, companies, and countries; and the well-being of future generation s depends.”
- When starting a dialogue about genetic engineering, think about these 8 summarized questions that the book has laid out:
  - What can be done to ensure the broadest possible access to the health and well-being benefits of genetic tech?
  - Should there be limits on the application of genetic technologies to treat or eliminate diseases? If so, what should they be?
  - Should people have full access to information about their own and their potential future children’s genetic makeup or should this access be limited? If limited, what should the restrictions be and why?
  - Should parents be allowed unlimited freedom to select from among their natural embryos during IVF? If not, on what basis should limitations be set? Should parents be allowed to select embryos based on non-disease-related traits, like height, IQ, personality, etc?
  - If proven safe, should precision gene editing be used to eliminate genetic diseases in adult sex cells and preimplanted embryos in a manner that would be passed to future generations?
  - Do we need a global framework to help prevent the worst abuses of human genetic engineering? What standards should we follow?
  - Which institutions do we need to foster an inclusive global dialogue on the future of human genetic engineering that optimize the benefits of these technologies and minimize potential harm?
  - What more can be done to help ensure the genetic revolution helps enhance all of our humanity, and how can each of us be better engaged in this process?
