---
title: Travel
date: 2021-01-31 11:33:00 +0800
categories: [sunday-snippets]
tags: [travel, think-roam]     # TAG names should always be lowercase
---

## What I’ve been thinking about

As we approach the second year of the pandemic with no end in sight, I begin to realize the role traveling has played in my life. I always harbour hope for a world adventure after retirement - a journey that would let me see the rest of the world before I return to dust. That is several years from now and admittedly seems far-fetched. What is not far-fetched, however, is the yearly travelling goals that I set for myself. Now, even as I fill my time with other goals, I find the hole travelling has left too large to ignore.

But it has also occurred to me that I spent a lot of time planning for leisure. Travelling with friends serve as built-in breaks between my working days. Travelling to see, but also to run away from reality, as if reality is something so boring, so suffocating that I have to use travelling as an escape route.

That hadn't been my original intention.

I remember setting foot in Europe for the first time, and for the next four months, the thrill of seeking out new lands never ceased to amaze me. The first time in Prague's Central Square, the first time crossing the Chain Bridge in Budapest, the documentary about Anne Frank I saw in her original house in Amsterdam, the Berlin Wall, once dividing a country, was illuminated in graffiti. Each trip didn't feel like a run from 'reality', it was instead truly a journey of exploration, where I soak in every sight like a sponge. I was poor then; there hadn't been fancy hotels or dinners. Of course, I know that my definition of poor is already by itself a snobbish thought, but the world through the eyes of someone who doesn't travel for leisure, but to see and to learn, is a world of never-ending fascination. It also explains why I despised travelling on tour groups and convinced my Mum that we should design our own itinerary, or set out on a solo trip to Hong Kong, refusing to rely on other people's availability.

And thus I realized that not only have I slowly lost the true essence of travel I once embraced but the notion of using travel as an escape route is ridiculous. Travel isn't leisure - travel is a part of my learning journey. And the reality isn't something to escape from; it is my base. If I feel that I have to escape from it, then something isn't working.

I don't know when my next adventure will be, but I know one thing - Focus on the reality I wish to build for myself.

## Video of the Week

Don't watch videos, and go read r/wallstreetbets instead. It's fucking epic.

## Quote of the week

> “I experienced failure and learned to buck up so I could rally those who’d put their trust in me. I suffered rejections and insults often enough to stop fearing them. In other words, I grew up—and got my sense of humor back.”
*Barack Obama, A Promised Land*

Charge in, guns blazing!
